index.md, before:

# Oliver Gorton

<img src='images/oliver.jpg' width="150" id="profile_pic"/>

[Github profile](https://github.com/ogorton)\
[Notes](blog.html)

[Code](#code)\
[Education](#education)\
[Research positions](#research-positions)\
[Experience](#experience-and-training)\
[Awards](#awards)\
[Journal Papers](#journal-papers)\
[Conference Proceedings](#conference-proceedings)\
[Thesis](#thesis)\
[Presentations](#presentations)


## Summary

Ph.D. Candidate from San Diego State University and University of California, 
Irvine, currently at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

I use scientific computing to study the structure and properties of atomic
nuclei. I have worked on a number of different topics in nuclear
structure and reaction theory, quantum chemistry, quantum information theory,
and machine learning. All of my work involves the application of high
performance computing (HPC) to quantum many-body physics.

My (ongoing) Ph.D. project is on the integrated shell model and Hauser-Feshbach
description of beta-delayed neutron emission.

Last updated February 2023.

## Code

Languages

* *Major projects*: Modern Fortran, Python, Bash
* *Minor tasks*: C++, openMP, MPI, Mathematica, MATLAB, R

**Wigner** [[Code]](https://github.com/ogorton/wigner) \
A library of functions for computation of Wigner 3-j, 6-j and 9-j symbols, written in modern Fortran.

**dmscatter** [[Code]](https://github.com/ogorton/dmfortfactor)\
A fast Fortran code for WIMP-nucleus form factors and differential event rate spectra. Written in
  modern Fortran with an optional Python interface. Parallel execution with OpenMP.
  
**PANASH** [Not released]\
Proton and neutron approximate shell model code. Not yet released.

**COMMCAS** [Not released]\
Computational Model Monte Carlo Sampler. Not yet released.

## Education
**PhD Computational Science**, expected 2023 - [Joint Doctoral Program with UC
  Irvine and San Diego State University](https://computationalscience.uci.edu)

**MS Physics**, 2018 - San Diego State University

**BA Physics**, 2016 - University of California, Berkeley

## Research Positions

* PhD Candidate -- LLNL, 2022 to present
  * New predictive capability for reaction and decay properties of fission
    fragments
* Graduate Research Assistant -- SDSU Research Foundation with [Calvin
  Johnson](http://sci.sdsu.edu/johnson/), 2019 to 2021
  * Developed software and theory to describe atomic nuclei using the nuclear
    shell model and computaional science
* Glenn T. Seaborg Institute (GTSI) Summer Intern (Virtual) -- [Seaborg Institute,
  LLNL](https://seaborg.llnl.gov), Summer 2021
* High Energy Density Physics Intern (Virtual) -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2020
  * Developed Python code to do MCMC parameter estimation for statistical
    nuclear reaction codes in order to combine surrogate data and theory
  * Employed code for sensitivity studies assessing approximations in the
    surrogate reactions method
  * Modified and ran four Hauser-Feshbach model codes
 * High Energy Density Physics Intern -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2019
 * High Energy Density Physics Intern -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2018
* Graduate Student -- UC Irvine, Department of Chemistry with [Filipp
  Furche](https://ffgroup.chem.uci.edu/members/filipp/), Fall 2019 and Spring 2020.
  * Collaborated to develop formalism for Nuclear-Electronic Orbital method
    using time-dependent density functional theory

## Experience and Training

* Served as a referee for Physical Review C
* Experienced writing proposals for DOE, NNSA, and other funding sources
* Attended "FRIB-TA Summer School: A practical walk through formal scattering theory", 2021
  * [Course resources](https://fribtascattering.github.io)
  * Connecting bound states, resonances, and scattering states in exotic nuclei
    and beyond
* Attended "Agile Development Practices and Tools: A Guided Tour", 2020
  * Sustainable Horizons Institute introduction to agile software development
  * Collaborative source control using git, GitHub, and git workflows
* Attended "Technical Writing Workshop", 2019
  * LLNL PLS Directorate sponsored two-part writing class
  * Session 1: Structuring your research paper
  * Session 2: Clear, accurate, concise writing    
* Graduate Teaching Associate -- San Diego State Univeristy, Department of
  Physics, during 2016 - 2020.
  * Independently lead lectures and exams for introductory-level physics lab courses
  * Modernized [the manual](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pejqikoYhlaIMhSzBzUzrnh2hDrC_q-bEcJCeflpX7w/edit?usp=sharing)
    for Physics 182A/195L Laboratory for online deployment in Spring 2020

## Awards

* [LLNL WCI Academic Collaboration Team
  University Program](https://www.llnl.gov/news/labs-act-awards-focus-collaborative-university-research) (ACT-UP) Award
* Graduate S-STEM Scholarship, 2018-2020

## Journal Papers

**Proton-neutron entanglement in the nuclear shell model** \
  C. W. Johnson and O. C. Gorton \
  Publication [J. Phys. G.: Nucl. Part. Phys. 50 045110](https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6471/acbece)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2210.14338](http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14338)

**dmscatter: A Fast Program for WIMP-Nucleus Scattering** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, C. Jiao, J. Nikoleyczik \
  Publication [J. of Comp. Phys. Comm. Vol. 284, 108597, March 2023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2022.108597)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2209.09187](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.09187)

**Cross sections for neutron-induced reactions from surrogate data: Reexamining 
  the Weisskopf-Ewing approximation for (n,n') and (n,2n) reactions**\
  O. C. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Publication [Phys. Rev. C 107, 044612, April 2023](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.107.044612)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2102.03452](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03452)

**Measurements of proton capture in the A=100-110 mass region: Constraints of the
  111In(gamma,p)/(gamma,n) branching point relevant to the gamma-process** \
  O. Olivas-Gomez, A. Simon, O. Gorton, J. E. Escher et al. \
  Publication [Phys. Rev. C, Vol. 102, 055806, Nov. 2020](https://journals.aps.org/prc/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevC.102.055806)

## Conference Proceedings

**A Problem in the Statistical Description of Beta-Delayed Neutron Emission** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, and J. Escher \
  Submitted to proceedings of 
  15th International Conference on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology (ND2022). \
  Preprint [arXiv:2210.05904](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05904)
  
 **Improving nuclear data evaluations with predictive reaction theory and indirect
   measurements** \
   J. Escher, K. Bergstrom, E. Chimanski, O. Gorton, E. J. In, 
   M. Kruse, S. Peru, C. Pruitt, R. Rahman, E. Shinkle, A. Thapa, W. Younes \
   Submitted to proceedings of 15th International Conference on Nuclear Data for 
   Science and Technology (ND2022)\
   Preprint [arXiv:2304:10034](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.10034)
  
**Neutron capture cross sections from surrogate reaction data and theory:
  connecting the pieces with a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Publication
  [Spring Proceedings in Physics, Vol. 254, 229-231, Sep. 2020](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58082-7_28). \
  Preprint [arXiv:1905:03055](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03055)

## Thesis

**Efficient Modeling of Nuclei Through Coupling of Proton and Neutron
  Wavefunctions** \
  O. Gorton, Advisor: C. Johnson \
  [Masters Thesis (2018) San Diego State University, 
  2018](https://csu-sdsu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/01CALS_SDL/r45sar/alma991023475280402917)

## Presentations

**Nuclear Shell Model to the Rescue: Efforts to Resolve a Mystery in Beta 
  Delayed Neutron Emission**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher \
  Talk at APS Division of Nuclear Physics Fall 2022 Meeting ( New Orleans, October 
  2022)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp22.pdf)

**Crisis in Beta-Delayed Neutron Emission: Shell Model to the Rescue**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher\
  Talk at Nuclear Data Conference (July 2022).\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_nd22.pdf)

**Proton and Neutron Approximate Shell Model: Factorization-based Importance
  Truncation** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher \
  Poster at Nuclear Structure Conference (June 2022)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_ns22.pdf)

**DMFortFactor: A Fast and Accessible for Computing WIMP-Nucleus-Scattering
  Event-Rates**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, C. Jiao\
  Talk at DNP21 APS Conference (October 2021)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp21.pdf)

**Better MCMC for Nuclear Data using emcee and B-DJINN**\
  O. C. Gorton, J. E. Escher, K. O. Bergstrom, M. K. Kruse \
  Talk given at LLNL Summer Slam 2021\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl21.pdf)

**Nuclear Physics for WIMPs** \
  O. Gorton and C. W. Johnson \
  Talk at SDSU SIAM Student Chapter Summer Colloquium Series, Friday July 2, 2021\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_csrc21.pdf)

**Cross subsections for neutron reactions from surrogate measurements:
  Revisiting the Weisskopf-Ewing approximation** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Talk at DNP20 APS Conference (October 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp20.pdf)
  
**Can we get rid of the theorists?** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Talk at LLNL Summer Slam (August 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl20.pdf)

**Big Picture and Background for Nuclear-Electronic Orbital (NEO) Approach:
  Calculating Mixed Nucleon-Electron Wave Functions** \
  O. Gorton \
  Seminar for the Furche Group, Chemistry Department, UC Irvine (March 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_uci20.pdf)

**Indirect measurements of nuclear cross subsections: tempering experimental
  results with theory** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Seminar for HEDP Exit Talk (September 2019)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl19b.pdf)

**Sensitivity Study of the Surrogate Method**\
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Poster at LLNL Student Poster Symposium (August 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_llnl19a.pdf)

**Temperature and Entropy in the Nuclear Shell Model** \
  O. Gorton and C. W. Johnson \
  Poster at SDSU ACCESS event (April 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_csrc19.pdf)

**Proton Neutron Interacting Shell Model: Order of Magnitude Reduction for
  Medium Mass Nuclei** \
  O. Gorton and C. Johnson \
  Poster at SDSU annual research symposium (March 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_sdsu19.pdf)

**Neutron capture cross subsections from surrogate reaction data and theory:
  connecting the pieces with a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Poster at Compound Nuclear Reactions conference [CNR18](https://indico.bnl.gov/event/4158),  September 2018\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_cnr18.pdf)

**A Markov Chain Monte Carlo Tool for Hauser-Feshbach Codes**\
  O. Gorton and J.E. Escher \
  Seminar for HEDP Exit Talk (August 2018)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl18.pdf)

## Climbing

In my free time I enjoy rock climbing.

<img src='images/climbing.jpeg' width="300"/>

Commit message:

new summary, new publication links

index.md, after:

# Oliver Gorton

Ph.D. Candidate from San Diego State University and University of California,
Irvine, currently at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

<img src='images/oliver.jpg' width="150" id="profile_pic"/>

[Github profile](https://github.com/ogorton)\
[Notes](blog.html)

[Code](#code)\
[Education](#education)\
[Research positions](#research-positions)\
[Experience](#experience-and-training)\
[Awards](#awards)\
[Journal Papers](#journal-papers)\
[Conference Proceedings](#conference-proceedings)\
[Thesis](#thesis)\
[Presentations](#presentations)

## Summary

My dissertation project is on the integrated shell-model and Hauser-Feshbach
description of beta-delayed neutron emission.

In my research, I use computational science to study nuclear structure and
reactions. My work has touched on a number of topics in related fields such as
the search for dark matter, nuclear data and evaluations, uncertainty
quantification, and machine learning. All of my work involves scientific and
high performance computing.

## Code

Languages

* *Major projects*: Modern Fortran, Python, Bash
* *Minor tasks*: C++, openMP, MPI, Mathematica, MATLAB, R

**Wigner** [[Code]](https://github.com/ogorton/wigner) \
A library of functions for computation of Wigner 3-j, 6-j and 9-j symbols,
written in modern Fortran.

**dmscatter** [[Code]](https://github.com/ogorton/dmfortfactor)\
A fast Fortran code for WIMP-nucleus form factors and differential event rate
spectra. Written in modern Fortran with an optional Python interface. Parallel
execution with OpenMP.
  
**PANASH** [Not released]\
Proton and neutron approximate shell model code. Not yet released.

**COMMCAS** [Not released]\
Computational Model Monte Carlo Sampler. Not yet released.

## Education
**PhD Computational Science**, expected 2023 - [Joint Doctoral Program with UC
  Irvine and San Diego State University](https://computationalscience.uci.edu)

**MS Physics**, 2018 - San Diego State University

**BA Physics**, 2016 - University of California, Berkeley

## Research Positions

* PhD Candidate -- LLNL, 2022 to present
  * New predictive capability for reaction and decay properties of fission
    fragments
* Graduate Research Assistant -- SDSU Research Foundation with [Calvin
  Johnson](http://sci.sdsu.edu/johnson/), 2019 to 2021
  * Developed software and theory to describe atomic nuclei using the nuclear
    shell model and computaional science
* Glenn T. Seaborg Institute (GTSI) Summer Intern (Virtual) -- [Seaborg Institute,
  LLNL](https://seaborg.llnl.gov), Summer 2021
* High Energy Density Physics Intern (Virtual) -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2020
  * Developed Python code to do MCMC parameter estimation for statistical
    nuclear reaction codes in order to combine surrogate data and theory
  * Employed code for sensitivity studies assessing approximations in the
    surrogate reactions method
  * Modified and ran four Hauser-Feshbach model codes
 * High Energy Density Physics Intern -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2019
 * High Energy Density Physics Intern -- [Lawrence Livermore National
  Laboratory](https://www.llnl.gov), Summer 2018
* Graduate Student -- UC Irvine, Department of Chemistry with [Filipp
  Furche](https://ffgroup.chem.uci.edu/members/filipp/), Fall 2019 and Spring 2020.
  * Collaborated to develop formalism for Nuclear-Electronic Orbital method
    using time-dependent density functional theory

## Experience and Training

* Served as a referee for Physical Review C
* Experienced writing proposals for DOE, NNSA, and other funding sources
* Attended "FRIB-TA Summer School: A practical walk through formal scattering theory", 2021
  * [Course resources](https://fribtascattering.github.io)
  * Connecting bound states, resonances, and scattering states in exotic nuclei
    and beyond
* Attended "Agile Development Practices and Tools: A Guided Tour", 2020
  * Sustainable Horizons Institute introduction to agile software development
  * Collaborative source control using git, GitHub, and git workflows
* Attended "Technical Writing Workshop", 2019
  * LLNL PLS Directorate sponsored two-part writing class
  * Session 1: Structuring your research paper
  * Session 2: Clear, accurate, concise writing    
* Graduate Teaching Associate -- San Diego State Univeristy, Department of
  Physics, during 2016 - 2020.
  * Independently lead lectures and exams for introductory-level physics lab courses
  * Modernized [the manual](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pejqikoYhlaIMhSzBzUzrnh2hDrC_q-bEcJCeflpX7w/edit?usp=sharing)
    for Physics 182A/195L Laboratory for online deployment in Spring 2020

## Awards

* [LLNL WCI Academic Collaboration Team
  University Program](https://www.llnl.gov/news/labs-act-awards-focus-collaborative-university-research) (ACT-UP) Award
* Graduate S-STEM Scholarship, 2018-2020

## Journal Papers

**Proton-neutron entanglement in the nuclear shell model** \
  C. W. Johnson and O. C. Gorton \
  Publication [J. Phys. G.: Nucl. Part. Phys. 50 045110](https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6471/acbece)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2210.14338](http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.14338)

**dmscatter: A Fast Program for WIMP-Nucleus Scattering** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, C. Jiao, J. Nikoleyczik \
  Publication [J. of Comp. Phys. Comm. Vol. 284, 108597, March 2023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2022.108597)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2209.09187](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.09187)

**Cross sections for neutron-induced reactions from surrogate data: Reexamining 
  the Weisskopf-Ewing approximation for (n,n') and (n,2n) reactions**\
  O. C. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Publication [Phys. Rev. C 107, 044612, April 2023](https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.107.044612)\
  Pre-print [arXiv:2102.03452](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03452)

**Measurements of proton capture in the A=100-110 mass region: Constraints of the
  111In(gamma,p)/(gamma,n) branching point relevant to the gamma-process** \
  O. Olivas-Gomez, A. Simon, O. Gorton, J. E. Escher et al. \
  Publication [Phys. Rev. C, Vol. 102, 055806, Nov. 2020](https://journals.aps.org/prc/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevC.102.055806)

## Conference Proceedings

**A Problem in the Statistical Description of Beta-Delayed Neutron Emission** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, and J. Escher \
  Publication [EPJ Web of Conf. 284, 03013 (2023)](https://doi.org/10.1051/epjconf/202328403013)\
  Preprint [arXiv:2210.05904](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.05904)
  
 **Improving nuclear data evaluations with predictive reaction theory and indirect
   measurements** \
   J. Escher, K. Bergstrom, E. Chimanski, O. Gorton, E. J. In, 
   M. Kruse, S. Peru, C. Pruitt, R. Rahman, E. Shinkle, A. Thapa, W. Younes\
   Publication [EPJ Web of Conf. 284, 03012 (2023)](https://doi.org/10.1051/epjconf/202328403012)\
   Preprint [arXiv:2304:10034](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.10034)
  
**Neutron capture cross sections from surrogate reaction data and theory:
  connecting the pieces with a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Publication
  [Spring Proceedings in Physics, Vol. 254, 229-231, Sep. 2020](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58082-7_28). \
  Preprint [arXiv:1905:03055](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03055)

## Thesis

**Efficient Modeling of Nuclei Through Coupling of Proton and Neutron
  Wavefunctions** \
  O. Gorton, Advisor: C. Johnson \
  [Masters Thesis (2018) San Diego State University, 
  2018](https://csu-sdsu.primo.exlibrisgroup.com/permalink/01CALS_SDL/r45sar/alma991023475280402917)

## Presentations

**Nuclear Shell Model to the Rescue: Efforts to Resolve a Mystery in Beta 
  Delayed Neutron Emission**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher \
  Talk at APS Division of Nuclear Physics Fall 2022 Meeting ( New Orleans, October 
  2022)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp22.pdf)

**Crisis in Beta-Delayed Neutron Emission: Shell Model to the Rescue**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher\
  Talk at Nuclear Data Conference (July 2022).\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_nd22.pdf)

**Proton and Neutron Approximate Shell Model: Factorization-based Importance
  Truncation** \
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, J. Escher \
  Poster at Nuclear Structure Conference (June 2022)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_ns22.pdf)

**DMFortFactor: A Fast and Accessible for Computing WIMP-Nucleus-Scattering
  Event-Rates**\
  O. Gorton, C. Johnson, C. Jiao\
  Talk at DNP21 APS Conference (October 2021)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp21.pdf)

**Better MCMC for Nuclear Data using emcee and B-DJINN**\
  O. C. Gorton, J. E. Escher, K. O. Bergstrom, M. K. Kruse \
  Talk given at LLNL Summer Slam 2021\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl21.pdf)

**Nuclear Physics for WIMPs** \
  O. Gorton and C. W. Johnson \
  Talk at SDSU SIAM Student Chapter Summer Colloquium Series, Friday July 2, 2021\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_csrc21.pdf)

**Cross subsections for neutron reactions from surrogate measurements:
  Revisiting the Weisskopf-Ewing approximation** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Talk at DNP20 APS Conference (October 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_dnp20.pdf)
  
**Can we get rid of the theorists?** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Talk at LLNL Summer Slam (August 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl20.pdf)

**Big Picture and Background for Nuclear-Electronic Orbital (NEO) Approach:
  Calculating Mixed Nucleon-Electron Wave Functions** \
  O. Gorton \
  Seminar for the Furche Group, Chemistry Department, UC Irvine (March 2020)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_uci20.pdf)

**Indirect measurements of nuclear cross subsections: tempering experimental
  results with theory** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Seminar for HEDP Exit Talk (September 2019)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl19b.pdf)

**Sensitivity Study of the Surrogate Method**\
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher\
  Poster at LLNL Student Poster Symposium (August 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_llnl19a.pdf)

**Temperature and Entropy in the Nuclear Shell Model** \
  O. Gorton and C. W. Johnson \
  Poster at SDSU ACCESS event (April 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_csrc19.pdf)

**Proton Neutron Interacting Shell Model: Order of Magnitude Reduction for
  Medium Mass Nuclei** \
  O. Gorton and C. Johnson \
  Poster at SDSU annual research symposium (March 2019)\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_sdsu19.pdf)

**Neutron capture cross subsections from surrogate reaction data and theory:
  connecting the pieces with a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo approach** \
  O. Gorton and J. E. Escher \
  Poster at Compound Nuclear Reactions conference [CNR18](https://indico.bnl.gov/event/4158),  September 2018\
  [PDF](./posters/gorton_cnr18.pdf)

**A Markov Chain Monte Carlo Tool for Hauser-Feshbach Codes**\
  O. Gorton and J.E. Escher \
  Seminar for HEDP Exit Talk (August 2018)\
  [PDF](./talks/gorton_llnl18.pdf)

## Climbing

In my free time I enjoy rock climbing.

<img src='images/climbing.jpeg' width="300"/>

Page last updated May 2023
